
The pathogenic Yersinia species, Y. pseudotuberculosis, Y.  enterocolitica, and Y. pestis, are zoonotic agents that cause disease in humans ranging from mild gastroenteritis to life-threatening plague. Human clinical infections caused by Y.  pseudotuberculosis and Y. enterocolitica most frequently occur after the ingestion of contaminated food or water, whereas the etiologic agent of plague, Y. pestis, is naturally vectored to humans by fleas. These species are joined by 11 lesser-known Yersinia species which are largely considered environmental species, nonpathogenic to humans (Table 1). Pathogenic Yersinia species share a highly conserved virulence plasmid and a chromosomal high pathogenicity island (HPI) and show tropism for lymphoid tissue, where their ability to evade host innate immunity enables extracellular proliferation. Popular awareness of the tens of millions of human deaths caused by the plague bacillus, Y. pestis, in each of three pandemics is contrasted by relative ignorance of the current global reach of plague, its firm entrenchment in a number of recent rodent-flea cycles covering much of the western United States and other parts of the world, and its reemergence as a significant human pathogen in parts of eastern Africa and Madagascar. This agent was weaponized by the United States, Japan, and former USSR during and after World War II and remains a high-level biothreat agent. Increased biomedical research, in response to these concerns, has led to a number of recent advances in our understanding of invasiveness and immune system evasion by Y. pestis and the closely related Y. pseudotuberculosis and Y. enterocolitica and exciting new laboratory diagnostic and vaccine development approaches ([10], [13], [59], [68]).

##TAXONOMY AND HISTORY OF THE GENUS

The agent of plague, Y. pestis (previously Bacterium pestis, Bacillus pestis, and Pasteurella pestis), was first identified in lymph node aspirates from plague victims in 1894 by Alexander Yersin during his investigation of the leading edge of the third pandemic as it swept quickly from mainland China to Hong Kong and beyond. Further, he demonstrated that laboratory mice and rats inoculated with pure cultures of the gram-negative coccobacillus produced symptoms of plague and death. Four years later, while investigating the advancing epidemic in India, Paul-Louis Simond and Masanori Ogata independently implicated the role of fleas as vectors of disease transmission between rodents and humans. By the early 1900s, plague was introduced along steamship routes to every human-inhabited continent and was responsible for more than 12 million deaths, most of them in India and China ([59]). Today, plague remains enzootic in parts of Africa, North and South America, and much of Asia.

By 1944, cumulative phenotypic and genotypic peculiarities of Pasteurella pestis and P. pseudotuberculosis prompted their transfer to the new genus Yersinia. Ten years later, Yersinia species were included in the family Enterobacteriaceae, and in 1964 Y. enterocolitica was added to the genus.  The diverse group members of Y. enterocolitica were further divided into a subgroup initially designated Y. enterocolitica-like organisms and later into an additional four species (Y.  intermedia, Y. frederiksenii, Y. kristensenii, and Y. aldovae) based on sugar fermentation and DNA relatedness. Subsequent species designations include Y. ruckeri (serogroup 01, the agent of enteric red mouth disease in rainbow trout), Y. rohdei, Y. mollaretii, and Y. bercovieri. Three additional species have been described since 2005, bringing the total to 14 (www.bacterio.cict.fr/xz/yersinia.html).  Yersinia species have a G1C content of 46 to 50%.  By DNA-DNA hybridization, Yersinia species are related to other members of the family Enterobacteriaceae by 10 to 32%. Intraspecies relatedness is variable, ranging from 55 to 74%, with the notable exception of Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis, which demonstrate more than 90% relatedness.

The sequenced and annotated genomes of Y. pestis biovar Orientalis and biovar Medievalis were published in 2001 and 2002, respectively ([22], [57]). Since then the genomes of at least a dozen additional Y. pestis strains have been released (13). In 2004, the Y. pseudotuberculosis genome was published along with a comparative genomic analysis of Y.  pestis (16). Completion and analysis of these genomes have solidified a large body of prior genetic evidence suggesting that Y. pestis evolved from Y. pseudotuberculosis prior to the first plague pandemic. Were it not for the profoundly distinct mechanisms of pathogenesis and natural maintenance, taxonomists would likely merge Y. pseudotuberculosis and Y. pestis. The genome of Y. enterocolitica was published in 2006 ([76]) and has enabled further understanding of the common and unique genetic lineages and functions of the pathogenic Yersinia species.

##DESCRIPTION OF THE AGENTS

Yersinia species, as members of the family Enterobacteriaceae, are gram-negative, non-spore-forming bacilli that exhibit bipolar staining particularly when seen in primary specimens stained with Giemsa or Wayson's dye. The bacilli are smaller (0.5 to 0.8 mm in diameter and 1 to 3 mm in length) than other members of their family and tend to grow more slowly as well. With the exception of Y. pestis, Yersinia species are motile at 25°C due to peritrichous or paripolar flagella (Table 1). Interestingly, the pathogenic yersiniae either repress (Y. pseudotuberculosis and Y. enterocolitica) or, through mutation, have lost the capability to express (Y.  pestis) the flagellar apparatus; by either mechanism they effectively avoid stimulation of innate immune responses to these potent inducers.

#REFERENCES

[10]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19606935 "Butler, T. 2009. Plague into the 21st century. Clin. Infect. Dis. 49:736-742"  

[13]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15358858 "Chain, P. S., E. Carniel, F. W. Larimer, J. Lamerdin, P. O.  Stoutland, W. M. Regala, A. M. Georgescu, L. M. Vergez, M. L. Land, V. L. Motin, R. R. Brubaker, J. Fowler, J.  Hinnebusch, M. Marceau, C. Medigue, M. Simonet, V.  Chenal-Francisque, B. Souza, D. Dacheux, J. M. Elliott, A.  Derbise, L. J. Hauser, and E. Garcia. 2004. Insights into the evolution of Yersinia pestis through whole-genome comparison with Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:13826-13831"

[16]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18466178 "Chen, C. L., J. C. Yu, S. Holme, M. R. Jacobs, R. Yomtovian, and C. P. McDonald. 2008. Detection of bacteria in stored red cell products using a culture-based bacterial detection system.  Transfusion 48:1550-1557" 

[22]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12142430 "Deng, W., V. Burland, G. Plunkett III, A. Boutin, G. F.  Mayhew, P. Liss, N. T. Perna, D. J. Rose, B. Mau, S. Zhou, D.  C. Schwartz, J. D. Fetherston, L. E. Lindler, R. R. Brubaker, G. V. Plano, S. C. Straley, K. A. McDonough, M. L. Nilles, J. S. Matson, F. R. Blattner, and R. D. Perry. 2002. Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis KIM. J. Bacteriol. 184:4601-4611."

[57]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11586360  "Parkhill, J., B. W. Wren, N. R. Thomson, R. W. Titball, M. T. Holden, M. B. Prentice, M. Sebaihia, K. D. James, C. Churcher, K. L. Mungall, S. Baker, D. Basham, S. D. Bentley, K. Brooks, A. M. Cerdeno-Tarraga, T.  Chillingworth, A. Cronin, R. M. Davies, P. Davis, G. Dougan, T. Feltwell, N. Hamlin, S. Holroyd, K. Jagels, A. V.  Karlyshev, S. Leather, S. Moule, P. C. Oyston, M. Quail, K.  Rutherford, M. Simmonds, J. Skelton, K. Stevens, S. Whitehead, and B. G. Barrell. 2001. Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague. Nature 413:523-527." 

[59]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8993858 "Perry, R. D., and J. D. Fetherston. 1997. Yersinia pestis--etiologic agent of plague. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 10:35-66."

[68]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18324890 "Smiley, S. T. 2008. Current challenges in the development of vaccines for pneumonic plague. Expert Rev. Vaccines 7:209-221."

[76]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17173484 "Thomson, N. R., S. Howard, B. W. Wren, M. T. Holden, L. Crossman, G. L. Challis, C. Churcher, K. Mungall, K.  Brooks, T. Chillingworth, T. Feltwell, Z. Abdellah, H.  Hauser, K. Jagels, M. Maddison, S. Moule, M. Sanders, S.  Whitehead, M. A. Quail, G. Dougan, J. Parkhill, and M.  B. Prentice. 2006. The complete genome sequence and comparative genome analysis of the high pathogenicity Yersinia enterocolitica strain 8081. PLoS Genet. 2:e206."

